---
layout: post
title: Eating and music in the modern age - let’s design
date: 2022-02-06
author: Diana Tosca
comments: true
permalink: /week-2-reflection/
---
There were a few times where I scoffed at the documentary *Being in the World*, as a bunch of pretentious white-men scholars theorized about the traditions of jazz, New Orleans cuisine, and traditional flamenco music. I felt offended at the notion that these scholars were valorizing the (oftentimes inaccessible) artisan goods as superior and scared of the mass produced object. They asserted that mass production cheapened things, when I wholeheartedly believed that the mass production of objects could have it’s benefits. Why does the CD we listen to have to be worse than the jazz concert we see live? Is the CD making and mixing process not a craft in it’s own right? The jazz musicians play in a studio for the consumption of the music, in your own home. It’s true, they’re not playing the music for the context of your particular bedroom or living room, but they are playing with the mass consumer in mind; a mass consumer that may or may not be able to afford going to a jazz club and listening to the musical exchange and conversation that is tailored to the jazz club, the vibe of that night, and the audience.

The same could be said of the New Orleans restaurateur in the documentary; she saw the food she made as an act of community, of sharing with others. For her, the master chef, it didn’t matter what the food was, “it’s about bringing people together, it doesn’t matter if it’s ramen” or whatever. The important thing is the community itself. To me, it seemed as though the white scholars were contradicting themselves in the documentary, somehow deifying the artisan goods produced over the mass produced products.

The flamenco player spoke of the differences between a mass produced guitar, made by a machine, and an artisan-handcrafted guitar. The artisan guitar contains the energy of the human creator, the years of honing the craft, the wholeness of the trees gathered to make it. It is a wholly different and divine *thing*, rather than an *object* that exists in the world and can simply make music.

In an idealized world, we would have the artisans mastering their crafts, in community, and creating for each other. But we don’t live in that world - technology, capitalism, and colonialism have made us dependent on mass production for survival. We are workers who need the juice box for nourishment.

In reading *Ontological Design*, I found there wasn’t actually a contradiction on the part of the scholars in the documentary, but it showed me something deeper about creating community in the time of mass production. They described Heidegger's jug, the divine *thing* that has a holy, sacred quality about it, that takes from nature and gives water, wine, and juice - it shares and gives. The jug is juxtaposed with the worker’s juice box, an object, the office worker’s source of sustenance. Both the jug and the juice box are worldly - both satisfy thirst. But the juice box is the mass produced object, “it is not part of giving or sharing.” 

The same parallel can be drawn with the retauranteur’s example of ramen. She creates a gumbo, a beautiful and divine food, made with her hands, with years of skill and craftsmanship to share with her community. The ramen, the mass produced, no-effort food that poor college students use to feed themselves and push through their 3 a.m. homework assignments. The ramen is made in single packets, produced to be made in a microwave, quickly consumed, and resists sharing and community. As the essay reads, with regards to the juice box, “This is not to say that it can’t be given or shared at all… but rather that its design inclines against sharing.”

What does it mean when the craftsmen, the restaurateur, shares the mass produced ramen, in the same way that she shares her gumbo? What does it mean when I make two T.V. dinner frozen meals and share them with my wife? It’s an act of sharing, of taking an object meant for only one person and going against its intended use. The frozen meal was not made to be shared - but I share it anyway. It’s a means of sustenance that I can turn into an act of community.

And the same goes for the jazz music in the mass produced CD. The musician in the studio is playing with their fellow musician. They are not playing for me necessarily, in the time and space I embody in my living room. But when I listen to [Connect](https://www.allaboutjazz.com/album/connect-charles-tolliver) on vinyl in my living room with my wife, the music transcends space and time. I am transported to that world.

There’s a home video of me in 2009, playing my $64 ukulele at the family Christmas party, where we were all singing “El Burrito Sabanero,” with my little mass-produced ukulele leading the way. I played “Jingle-Bells” and “Feliz Navidad” on my $500 cheap electric keyboard. It’s a magical moment of community in my family, where the music created a gathering - a community. It was not a skilled demonstration of the prowess of my music making ability, but an act of sharing. It was an act of love, of oneness, singing the commercial songs we all knew on poorly produced and cheap instruments, in a commercial holiday that indulges in capitalism. We consumed our store-bought mass-produced cranberry sauce, our frozen industrialized corn, we shared and laughed. In the time of technology, to make *things* out of *objects* is an act of rebellion against the design. We are designing.