---
layout: post
title: taste regimes, social practices, and race
date: 2022-03-21
author: Diana Tosca
comments: true
permalink: /week-7-reflection/
---

Watching the Then & Now video *Bourdieu: Cultural Capital, the Love of Art & Hip Hop*, I was struck by how much of the cultural taste regimes developed by societies (at least in the west) are a reflection of economic status and social capital. The video had a motif of exclusion of certain groups from the elite taste regimes, where one is able to trade in cultural capital for institutional capital (using the example of an upper class student who read books like *The Odyssey* trading in their cultural capital for better grades in the form of institutional capital). In the video, they danced around the role race plays in this cultural capital, never mentioning it explicitly, but making allusions to it. The video talked about how economic factors and social class play greatly into taste regimes, surprisingly without mentioning race; of course, we know that social class, economic class, and race are all tied together (especially through generational wealth).


Culture is all around us and, mostly, invisible - thereby obscuring the taste regimes we are ingrained with as a result. I grew up in a fairly culturally monolithic area in the Miami/Hialeah area in south Florida - most of the population consisted of latino immigrants, predominantly Cuban (and often light skinned or white). There were a lot of cultural practices I carried (and still carry with me to this day) that I didn’t question, until I was dragged out of the culture when I went to Wellesley College. The white American culture that I only knew through television and media suddenly dominated my life. And I wondered why there were so many cultural milestones I didn’t understand that everyone else seemed to share (no, my dad doesn’t listen to Dave Matthews Band or U2; no,my family doesn’t make casseroles; no, I’ve never had a real Christmas tree). On the other hand, I wondered why there were so many obvious things to me that others in the dominant culture didn’t get (wait, you don’t eat rice with your meals? Why are you coming into my home with your shoes on? Wait, you’ve never been to a quinceañera?). 


Contrasting that with my wife's experience as a Colombian-American with immigrant parents; she grew up in Dorchester and went to Boston Latin School - she was immersed in a very different culture, the white dominant and elite culture. The cultural differences that had me taken aback when I moved to Boston did not surprise her - after all, they had been her cultural norm. On the contrary, a lot of the cultural practices my Cuban family in Miami grew up with turned out to be quite different from her Colombian family in Boston (they use the formal *usted* instead of the informal *tu* to speak to each other; dinner was early, at 6 p.m. when everyone got home from work; generally, the household was soft-spoken). But a lot of things were the same (pollo y arroz for dinner! no shoes in the house; pan caliente y café con leche; a spice rack full of goya). 


These social practices and taste regimes are, of course, informed by class and economic status, but the way I see it, they're at least equally informed by race. In the video *Bourdieu: Cultural Capital, the Love of Art & Hip Hop*, they also mentioned in the video how marginalized groups can “create new cultural capital,” transitioning to talking about hip-hop. I wonder if that’s true - or to what extent do marginalized groups have an influence over cultural capital. After all, it is the dominant class, those in power, who decide what taste regimes are respectable and which ones aren’t (“why is Beethoven more respectable than LL Cool J?”). Maybe there is something to be said about the cultural capital established in a particular group can diffuse to the top of the cultural hierarchy - things go mainstream often. I’m not an ethnomusicologist, but in the specific case of hip-hop, and music more generally in the United States, I’d argue that the profit motive certainly increased the value of it’s cultural capital. Why do we propagate the [myth that rock and roll was invented by Elvis Presley](http://affinitymagazine.us/2016/10/14/no-elvis-presley-did-not-invent-rock-n-roll/#:~:text=Lovers%20of%20rock%20will%20usually,of%20black%20culture%20and%20music.), a white man? Because to those with money, influence, and power in the United States, rock and roll is more palatable and consumable when presented by someone in the same place in the social hierarchy; and as we know, whiteness and money supersedes all in the United States.


Anyway, I just wish that the video would have spoken more specifically on how race factors into power and cultural capital.
