---
layout: post
title: semiotics, but make it ~gay
date: 2022-02-28
author: Diana Tosca
comments: true
permalink: /week-5-reflection/
---

While listening to the “Philosophize This!” podcast on Structuralism and Myth, I considered the cultural mythology around queerness and the LGBTQ+ community,* a mythology which is further propagated by media depictions of queer people. I want to, more formally, explore this queer mythology, when I’ve come across it in media and elsewhere, and to consider the impact it has on those in the LGBTA+ community.

I recently watched the 90s teen rom-com *But I’m a Cheerleader* for the first time (it’s [free on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0cD4f6fH6Mk)!!). “A naive teenager is sent to rehab camp when her straitlaced parents and friends suspect her of being a lesbian.” Megan, the main character, is subjected to an intervention, where her friends and family accuse her of being a lesbian. The cultural signifiers they use to accuse her of being a lesbian (comically) display the mythology of queerness in society - eating tofu and becoming a vegetarian, having posters of women (instead of men) in her locker, “gay iconography” posters in her bedroom. The way they deliver the “evidence” is in small baggies, signifying the ~gay crimes Megan committed. They bring Megan to a conversion camp, an imprisonment after she is found guilty of the ~gay crimes. Although satirical, it shows a truth about the perception of the LGBTQ+ community (especially in the 90s), with the signifiers of gay crime and gay punishment.

Drawing from Ferdinand Saussure and language, we can examine the etymology of the word often used to describe LGBTQ+ individuals: the **queer** umbrella term, the reclaimed slur that first meant strange, peculiar, and out of the ordinary; the freaks, the outsiders, those on the fringes of society. Now it’s become synonymous with us gays. I heard the word queer as an identity for the first time in 2014 (before I aligned myself with queerness). I was a prospective student at Wellesley College, and a group of us sat in a circle introducing ourselves, and someone said “I identify as queer.” I remember being taken aback, a little scared by the mysticism of the word - queer. I’d only ever heard that word on TV as a pejorative, and I bought the mythology surrounding queerness - the strange people, *los maricones*, as family would call them. 

The signifier “queer” points to the signified, the concept of the thing in the real world, the essence, the ontological. But my conception of “queer” at the time was so very different from my conception of it now, as it was once to be rooted in the cultural mythology of queerness informed by my deeply homophobic family. My understanding of what is being signified with the word queer has shifted tremendously. That begs the question - is the signified thing even real? Or does it just exist in our head as a construction? Is there a pureness to this thing we call queer, a tangible thing we can point to and say “This right here is the emodiment of queer itself,” or is it just an idea? The relationship between the representation and the interpretation is socially and culturally specific and constructed. Language shapes our relationship with the world, as there is a functional relationship between them. And my limited vocabulary for queerness at the time impeded my understanding of queerness for a long time. Gaining the language helped me construct a world of queerness.

Here we shift to [Charles Sanders Pierce’s triadic semiotic model](http://stuffaboutliterature.blogspot.com/2015/05/peirces-triadic-model-interpreting-signs.html). We have the representamen/signifier, the object/referent, and the interpretant/signified. Unlike with Saussure’s model, we have a subject, the interpretant, who sees the representamen/signifier and constructs a narrative around it. There’s a [gay ear myth](https://amatopiercing.com/2019/06/01/the-gay-ear-debunking-the-myth-for-pride-month/), where wearing an earring on a certain ear signals that you’re gay to others. The representamen/signifier is wearing one earring on a certain ear, the object/referant is (vaguely) “the gay identity,” and the interpretant/signified is “the person wearing one earring is gay.” Or pronoun pins - when someone wears a pronouns pin, the representamen/signifier is the pronoun pin, the object/referent is your identity (what pronouns you use), and the interpretant/signified could be “this person is aligned with the LGBTQ+ community.” That’s why you see a new wave of anti LGBTQ+ conservatives who say “I don’t do pronouns,” when, obviously, they have pronouns, because pronouns signify supporting the LGBTQ+ community.

As an aside,in general, I separate the notion of queerness and the LGBTQ+ identity. Queerness, for me, is a political identity and claiming of a community.  But I should read more on [queerness as a political identity](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/33732782.pdf). 