---
layout: post
title: telematic art, artistic failure, and queer temporality
date: 2022-03-28
author: Diana Tosca
comments: true
permalink: /week-8-reflection/
---

In my undergrad at Wellesley College, I took a music course that solidified my identity as a sound and multimedia artist - [Sound Art, Electronics, and Multi-media](https://catalog.wellesley.edu/course.php?pos=55&doc_type=MUS+277). Our class had a week-long workshop with the Montreal-based art and design studio [Daily Tous Les Jours](https://www.dailytouslesjours.com/en/work). They’re known for their interactive public installations, most in urban locations. One of their projects, *Musical Swings*, features swings that play notes when participants (participators?) swing on them; when the swings move together in unison, they play notes together and create a musical composition. It’s a beautiful installation piece, as well as a significant feat of engineering that I’m still in awe of.

For the workshop, we collaborated to create an interactive art piece and two people from the Daily Tous Les Jours guided us in the art practice. Our class divided into teams to make individual installations that would combine to form a giant public installation in the academic quad outdoors at Wellesley. My team focused on accessibility - cacophonic sounds would play as you walked up the stairs to highlight the inaccessibility of stairs to certain bodies. It was a nice idea, but it failed pretty badly in practice, for a few reasons. It was too cold and windy for people to care, the noisy sounds weren’t loud enough for anyone to hear, and I think the concept in general was a little too heady and lofty for a public installation, the context wasn’t right. The most successful (sub) installation of the larger installation was a simple drum machine - people would step on one of four wooden palettes, a motion sensor would activate, and a drum noise would happen. People loved it, and I was honestly kinda mad at how effective it was. I could’ve made that! Except, I couldn’t have made it, because that wasn’t my art.

The experience was my first real failure as an artist. Until that point, I hadn’t critically considered the audience in my art practice. My installation work mostly consisted of a passive audience; the audience subjected themselves to my sound art pieces, but I didn’t necessarily consider the audience as part of my artistic process. I treated my art as a cathartic experience for myself, reflecting on [my experiences with anxiety](https://dianatosca.com/short-of-breath-for-ten-minutes); people were invited to listen, but when I think back, ultimately the art was not for an audience, it was for myself. I think that’s why my team’s public installation failed conceptually - we weren’t thinking about the audience (I certainly wasn’t).

Situating that with the readings this week, the essay *Telematic Embrace: A Love Story?* had a line that stood out to me:
> Crucial to Ascott’s theory and practice of Telematic Art is the transformation of the viewer into an active participator who collaborates in creating the work, which is never a static product, but always remains in process throughout its duration.
I think *Musical Swings* (and most other Daily Tous Les Jours public installations) really embodies this ethos - the art cannot exist without an active participator, it is not static, it is a process. The swings don’t make music without the audience - and the more collaboration exists, the more the work is transformed. There is a temporality to it - the music stops when the participation and swinging stops.

I’ve also been thinking about queerness lately (I will always be thinking about it), and the telematic art essay made me think about one of my favorite art pieces of all time [*“Untitled” (Portrait of Ross in L.A.)* by Felix Gonzalez-Torres](https://publicdelivery.org/felix-gonzalez-torres-untitled-portrait-of-ross-in-l-a-1991/). Its use of audience participation is stunning and devastating. There’s a 175 pound pile of candy on the floor, museum goers/the audience takes a piece of candy, and slowly the pile dwindles. The candy represents the body of his boyfriend, Ross Laycock, as AIDS slowly depletes his body. Though it’s not telematic art, the viewer is an active participator in the work (and, in turn, an active participant in the destruction of the queer body). 

 The temporal aspect of telematic art made me think about queer temporality (as described in José Esteban Muñoz’s *Cruising Utopia*) and video games. One more quote from the essay:
>Couchot suggested that telematic networks “offer the artist the only medium really capable of breaking the barriers of time and space and which, one day, will set one free of the limits of individual, national, and cultural intelligence.” 
I wonder where this quote can exist in queerness - when [our time and space, the then and there, is so different from straight time, the here and now](https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/vacating-now-remembering-jose-esteban-munoz/).
The video game [Queers in love at the end of the world](https://w.itch.io/end-of-the-world) gives me some solace in that - a video game where you have ten seconds to spend with your love before “everything is wiped away.” Video games could be the one of the ultimate forms of love in technology and telematic art.
